README.md, before:

# bioCanon

bioCanon is a tool for developing canonical SNP based genotyping schemes.  bioCanon schemes 
are designed to be compatible with Biohansel.  Schemes exist for some common clonal 
pathogens, but there are many untapped applications.

This module includes functions to aid in the generation of k-mers linked to predefined groups
to serve as the basis for automatic scheme development.  The only test of k-mer quality is the
exclusion of k-mers with degenerate bases.  Further filtering of output kmers will be required
to improve the quality of the biohansel scheme.

## Alpha Version Disclaimer

bioCanon is currently undergoing active development and testing.  No guarantees of accuracy or 
correctness are provided.  Feedback is welcomed.

## Getting Started

These instructions will get you a copy of the project up and running on your local machine for 
development and testing purposes.

### Prerequisites
Several python packages are required to run bioCanon:
vcfpy,
argparse,
biopython,
ete3,
numpy, and
pandas

All of these packages can be installed via pip
```
pip install vcfpy
pip install argparse
pip install biopython
pip install ete3
pip install numpy
pip install pandas
```
Note: vcfpy has several python dependencies that will also need to be installed (cython, pysam) some of these 
require some libraries to be installed via apt-get (zlib1g-dev,  libbz2-dev and liblzma-dev on Ubuntu)

### Installing

After all dependencies have been installed bioCanon can be installed via pip from the GitHub repository

```
pip install git+https://github.com/almene/schemeDev.git#egg=biocanon-almene
```

### Using the Module

Once it has been installed, the module can be run from the command line.  There are several arguments that the module accepts.  Some of them are required and some are optional.

```
python3 -m bioCanon --in_vcf tests/examples/testing.vcf --in_nwk tests/examples/testing.nwk --reference tests/examples/ref.fasta --min_snps 2 --min_members 5 --min_parent 5 --outdir testcases
```

#### Arguments

##### --in_vcf
* Required

vcfpy reader compatible vcf file.  See vcfpy documentation for specific requirements

##### --in_nwk or --group_info
* Either --in_nwk or --group_info required

--in_nwk requires a Newick format tree file
```
((((((((((((Q,R),(O,P)),J),I),H),G),(S,F)),B),(C,(T,U))),(((M,N),(K,L)),E)),(D,V)),A);
```
--group_info requires a tsv format file that contains the group information

```
A    1    
B    2    2.1    2.1.1    2.1.1.1    2.1.1.1.1
C    2    2.1    2.1.1    2.1.1.2    2.1.1.2.1
D    2    2.2    
E    2    2.1    2.1.2    2.1.2.1    2.1.1.1.2
F    2    2.1    2.1.1    2.1.1.1    2.1.1.1.2    2.1.1.1.2.2
G    2    2.1    2.1.1    2.1.1.1    2.1.1.1.2    2.1.1.1.2.1    2.1.1.1.2.1.2
H    2    2.1    2.1.1    2.1.1.1    2.1.1.1.2    2.1.1.1.2.1    2.1.1.1.2.1.1    2.1.1.1.2.1.1.2
I    2    2.1    2.1.1    2.1.1.1    2.1.1.1.2    2.1.1.1.2.1    2.1.1.1.2.1.1    2.1.1.1.2.1.1.1    2.1.1.1.2.1.1.1.2
J    2    2.1    2.1.1    2.1.1.1    2.1.1.1.2    2.1.1.1.2.1    2.1.1.1.2.1.1    2.1.1.1.2.1.1.1    2.1.1.1.2.1.1.1.1    2.1.1.1.2.1.1.1.1.2
K    2    2.1    2.1.2    2.1.2.2    2.1.2.2.2
L    2    2.1    2.1.2    2.1.2.2    2.1.2.2.2
M    2    2.1    2.1.2    2.1.2.2    2.1.2.2.1
N    2    2.1    2.1.2    2.1.2.2    2.1.2.2.1
O    2    2.1    2.1.1    2.1.1.1    2.1.1.1.2    2.1.1.1.2.1    2.1.1.1.2.1.1    2.1.1.1.2.1.1.1    2.1.1.1.2.1.1.1.1    2.1.1.1.2.1.1.1.1.1    2.1.1.1.2.1.1.1.1.1.2
P    2    2.1    2.1.1    2.1.1.1    2.1.1.1.2    2.1.1.1.2.1    2.1.1.1.2.1.1    2.1.1.1.2.1.1.1    2.1.1.1.2.1.1.1.1    2.1.1.1.2.1.1.1.1.1    2.1.1.1.2.1.1.1.1.1.2
Q    2    2.1    2.1.1    2.1.1.1    2.1.1.1.2    2.1.1.1.2.1    2.1.1.1.2.1.1    2.1.1.1.2.1.1.1    2.1.1.1.2.1.1.1.1    2.1.1.1.2.1.1.1.1.1    2.1.1.1.2.1.1.1.1.1.1
R    2    2.1    2.1.1    2.1.1.1    2.1.1.1.2    2.1.1.1.2.1    2.1.1.1.2.1.1    2.1.1.1.2.1.1.1    2.1.1.1.2.1.1.1.1    2.1.1.1.2.1.1.1.1.1    2.1.1.1.2.1.1.1.1.1.1
S    2    2.1    2.1.1    2.1.1.1    2.1.1.1.2    2.1.1.1.2.2
T    2    2.1    2.1.1    2.1.1.2    2.1.1.2.2
U    2    2.1    2.1.1    2.1.1.2    2.1.1.2.2
V    2    2.2
```
Above is an example of the required format

##### --reference
* Required

fasta format reference genome file

##### --min_snps, --min_members, and --min_parent
* Optional

Integer variables that restrict what is considered a valid group: minimum number of snps that support a division, minimum members required to generate a valid group and minimum size difference between a subgroup and its parent group required for the subgroup to be considered valid

* Defaults : 2, 5, 2
##### --flanking
* Optional

Integer number of bases flanking the SNP site determines the k-mer size

* Default: 15

##### --outdir
* Optional

Name for an output directory

### Outputs
Three files will be produced by a successful run of the bioCanon module:
* codes.log
  * tab delimited
  * This file contains the samples used to build the scheme along with the biohansel code that they were assigned by the scheme
  ```
  Q	1.6
  R	1.6
  O	1.6
  P	1.6
  J	1.6
  I	1
  H	1
  G	1.5
  S	1.2
  ...
  ```
* a S[x]G[y]_biohansel.fasta file
  *standard fasta formating
  * This file contains all the non-degenerate positve and negative k-mers required for a biohansel scheme.  This will require further filtering for optimal scheme development
  * Naming convention is to include parameter information [x] is the required snp support per valid group and [y] is the minimum group size 
    ```
    >305-1
    GAACAGTGCGGGCTTTTTTTTCGACCAGAGA
    >negative305-1
    GAACAGTGCGGGCTTGTTTTTCGACCAGAGA
    >2685-1
    GGCGTTCTACAGCCATTATTATCAGCCCTTG
    >negative2685-1
    GGCGTTCTACAGCCACTATTATCAGCCCTTG
    >5021-1
    ATGACCCGCCAGTAATCATTGCGCCCGGTGG
    ...
    ```
* a S[x]G[y]_biohansel.log file
  * tab delimited
  * This file contains a more human-readable version of the information contained in the biohansel.fasta file
  * Naming convention is to include parameter information [x] is the required snp support per valid group and [y] is the minimum group size
    ```
    305	1	GAACAGTGCGGGCTTTTTTTTCGACCAGAGA
    negative305	1	GAACAGTGCGGGCTTGTTTTTCGACCAGAGA
    2685	1	GGCGTTCTACAGCCATTATTATCAGCCCTTG
    negative2685	1	GGCGTTCTACAGCCACTATTATCAGCCCTTG
    5021	1	ATGACCCGCCAGTAATCATTGCGCCCGGTGG
    negative5021	1	ATGACCCGCCAGTAACCATTGCGCCCGGTGG
    5392	1	CAGATTCACCACCACACGATCGCCCTGCGCC
    negative5392	1	CAGATTCACCACCACCCGATCGCCCTGCGCC
    1180	1	CAGATCCCCTGTCTGTTTAAAAATACCGGTA
    negative1180	1	CAGATCCCCTGTCTGATTAAAAATACCGGTA
    ...
    ```
* a S[x]G[y]snp_report.txt file
  * tab delimited
  * This file contains a detailed report of the results of bioCanon for each snp in the vcf file
  * Naming convention is to include parameter information [x] is the required snp support per valid group and [y] is the minimum group size
    ```
    Position	Included	Supports	 Exclusion Reason
    1366	N		 no variability in the supplied vcf file
    68	N		 could not be matched to a branch point in the data.
    1017	N		 could not be matched to a branch point in the data.
    366	N		 a non-degenerate 31bp kmer could not be generated.
    945	N		 a non-degenerate 31bp kmer could not be generated.
    2050	N		 a non-degenerate 31bp kmer could not be generated.
    T6736	N		the number of size difference between its group and the parent group was less than 1.
    T6991	N		the number of size difference between its group and the parent group was less than 1.
    5110	Y	1.1
    9797	Y	1.6
    ...
    ```

### Accessory Scripts

There are three tool/accessory scripts included with bioCanon: filter_vcf.py, scheme_qa_tool.py, and biohansel_to_tsv.py.

#### Scheme QA Tool

The scheme_qa_tool.py script takes a bioCannon scheme and a directory containg either .fastq or .fasta files.  It runs biohansel on the sequence data using the provided scheme to type the sequences.  Poorly performing tiles are identified and outputted to a .csv file which can be used as input to filter_vcf.py. 

##### Arguments

###### --in_scheme
* Required

Expects the name and path of a scheme file in the biohansel format.  bioCanon produces schemes in this format by default.

###### --in_seq_data
* Required

Expects a directory where the sequence or sequences of interest are stored.

###### --outdir
* Required

Expects an output directory.  Will overwrite existing files if the directory already exists.

###### --biohansel_arguments
* Optional

Expects a quoted string of biohansel arguments('--arg1 value1 --arg2 value2').

###### --filter_out_below
* Optional

Filter out tiles which fall below the specified ratio of occurrences of the tile/expected occurrences.  Each tile is expecte to occur once per sample.  Expects a floating point value.

###### --filter_out_above
* Optional

Filter out tiles which exceed the specified ratio.  Expects a floating point value.

##### Outputs

bioqa_kmer.tsv - A target/tile based summary report.
bioqa_filtered.tsv - A .tsv containing tiles filtered out based on user settings.

##### Examples

```
python3 ./bioCanon/scheme_qa_tool.py --in_scheme ./out/sample.fasta --in_seq_data ./bioqa_test/fastq_data_directory/  --outdir output_directory/ 
```

#### biohansel_to_tsv.py

##### Inputs

##### Outputs

#### filter_vcf.py

##### Inputs

##### Outputs

## Running the tests

Tests for the module can be found in the repository under the tests subfolder.  They are pytest compatible scripts and once downloaded can be read using the python -m pytest command from the downloaded repository directory.

The current testing suite tests functions in main by supplying them with test data and comparing it against an expected result.


## Authors

* **James Robertson** - Prototype Code
* **Amanda Saunders** - Code Optimization, Documentation, Tools
* **Justin Schonfeld** - Code Optimization, Documentation, Tools

See also the list of [contributors](https://github.com/your/project/contributors) who participated in this project.

## Contact

For questions about bioCanon which fall outside the usual Github framework please contact justin.schonfeld@canada.ca

## License

This project is licensed under the MIT License - see the [LICENSE.md](LICENSE.md) file for details

## Acknowledgments

* Genevieve Labbe and Shannon Eagle for testing.

Commit message:

The README was updated to reflect how bioCanon handles the presence of a 'Reference' sample in the tree.
The bioCanon main script was update to reflect a new reference feature as well as a bug fix - improper labeling of deep groups that have no supported parents.

README.md, after:

# bioCanon

bioCanon is a tool for developing canonical SNP based genotyping schemes.  bioCanon schemes 
are designed to be compatible with Biohansel.  Schemes exist for some common clonal 
pathogens, but there are many untapped applications.

This module includes functions to aid in the generation of k-mers linked to predefined groups
to serve as the basis for automatic scheme development.  The only test of k-mer quality is the
exclusion of k-mers with degenerate bases.  Further filtering of output kmers will be required
to improve the quality of the biohansel scheme.

## Alpha Version Disclaimer

bioCanon is currently undergoing active development and testing.  No guarantees of accuracy or 
correctness are provided.  Feedback is welcomed.

## Getting Started

These instructions will get you a copy of the project up and running on your local machine for 
development and testing purposes.

### Prerequisites
Several python packages are required to run bioCanon:
vcfpy,
argparse,
biopython,
ete3,
numpy, and
pandas

All of these packages can be installed via pip
```
pip install vcfpy
pip install argparse
pip install biopython
pip install ete3
pip install numpy
pip install pandas
```
Note: vcfpy has several python dependencies that will also need to be installed (cython, pysam) some of these 
require some libraries to be installed via apt-get (zlib1g-dev,  libbz2-dev and liblzma-dev on Ubuntu)

### Installing

After all dependencies have been installed bioCanon can be installed via pip from the GitHub repository

```
pip install git+https://github.com/almene/schemeDev.git#egg=biocanon-almene
```

### Using the Module

Once it has been installed, the module can be run from the command line.  There are several arguments that the module accepts.  Some of them are required and some are optional.

```
python3 -m bioCanon --in_vcf tests/examples/testing.vcf --in_nwk tests/examples/testing.nwk --reference tests/examples/ref.fasta --min_snps 2 --min_members 5 --min_parent 5 --outdir testcases
```

#### Arguments

##### --in_vcf
* Required

vcfpy reader compatible vcf file.  See vcfpy documentation for specific requirements

##### --in_nwk or --group_info
* Either --in_nwk or --group_info required

--in_nwk requires a tree in the Newick format.  

```
((((((((((((Q,R),(O,P)),J),I),H),G),(S,F)),B),(C,(T,U))),(((M,N),(K,L)),E)),(D,V)),A);
```

The Newick Standard automatically roots a tree.  If your tree was not rooted deliberately then your tree will be arbitrarily rooted simply by being in the Newick format.  This may result in unexpected behavior from the software.  

By default a reference sequence labeled 'Reference' will be screened out of consideration for partition membership.  If your reference sequence has another name in the tree you can use the '--reference_in_tree reference_name' option allows you to specify the leaf name to screen out.  Specifying a leaf name which is not present in the tree will mean that no leaf is screened out.

--group_info requires a tsv format file that contains the group information

```
A    1    
B    2    2.1    2.1.1    2.1.1.1    2.1.1.1.1
C    2    2.1    2.1.1    2.1.1.2    2.1.1.2.1
D    2    2.2    
E    2    2.1    2.1.2    2.1.2.1    2.1.1.1.2
F    2    2.1    2.1.1    2.1.1.1    2.1.1.1.2    2.1.1.1.2.2
G    2    2.1    2.1.1    2.1.1.1    2.1.1.1.2    2.1.1.1.2.1    2.1.1.1.2.1.2
H    2    2.1    2.1.1    2.1.1.1    2.1.1.1.2    2.1.1.1.2.1    2.1.1.1.2.1.1    2.1.1.1.2.1.1.2
I    2    2.1    2.1.1    2.1.1.1    2.1.1.1.2    2.1.1.1.2.1    2.1.1.1.2.1.1    2.1.1.1.2.1.1.1    2.1.1.1.2.1.1.1.2
J    2    2.1    2.1.1    2.1.1.1    2.1.1.1.2    2.1.1.1.2.1    2.1.1.1.2.1.1    2.1.1.1.2.1.1.1    2.1.1.1.2.1.1.1.1    2.1.1.1.2.1.1.1.1.2
K    2    2.1    2.1.2    2.1.2.2    2.1.2.2.2
L    2    2.1    2.1.2    2.1.2.2    2.1.2.2.2
M    2    2.1    2.1.2    2.1.2.2    2.1.2.2.1
N    2    2.1    2.1.2    2.1.2.2    2.1.2.2.1
O    2    2.1    2.1.1    2.1.1.1    2.1.1.1.2    2.1.1.1.2.1    2.1.1.1.2.1.1    2.1.1.1.2.1.1.1    2.1.1.1.2.1.1.1.1    2.1.1.1.2.1.1.1.1.1    2.1.1.1.2.1.1.1.1.1.2
P    2    2.1    2.1.1    2.1.1.1    2.1.1.1.2    2.1.1.1.2.1    2.1.1.1.2.1.1    2.1.1.1.2.1.1.1    2.1.1.1.2.1.1.1.1    2.1.1.1.2.1.1.1.1.1    2.1.1.1.2.1.1.1.1.1.2
Q    2    2.1    2.1.1    2.1.1.1    2.1.1.1.2    2.1.1.1.2.1    2.1.1.1.2.1.1    2.1.1.1.2.1.1.1    2.1.1.1.2.1.1.1.1    2.1.1.1.2.1.1.1.1.1    2.1.1.1.2.1.1.1.1.1.1
R    2    2.1    2.1.1    2.1.1.1    2.1.1.1.2    2.1.1.1.2.1    2.1.1.1.2.1.1    2.1.1.1.2.1.1.1    2.1.1.1.2.1.1.1.1    2.1.1.1.2.1.1.1.1.1    2.1.1.1.2.1.1.1.1.1.1
S    2    2.1    2.1.1    2.1.1.1    2.1.1.1.2    2.1.1.1.2.2
T    2    2.1    2.1.1    2.1.1.2    2.1.1.2.2
U    2    2.1    2.1.1    2.1.1.2    2.1.1.2.2
V    2    2.2
```
Above is an example of the required format

##### --reference
* Required

fasta format reference genome file

##### --min_snps, --min_members, and --min_parent
* Optional

Integer variables that restrict what is considered a valid group: minimum number of snps that support a division, minimum members required to generate a valid group and minimum size difference between a subgroup and its parent group required for the subgroup to be considered valid

* Defaults : 2, 5, 2
##### --flanking
* Optional

Integer number of bases flanking the SNP site determines the k-mer size

* Default: 15

##### --outdir
* Optional

Name for an output directory

### Outputs
Three files will be produced by a successful run of the bioCanon module:
* codes.log
  * tab delimited
  * This file contains the samples used to build the scheme along with the biohansel code that they were assigned by the scheme
  ```
  Q	1.6
  R	1.6
  O	1.6
  P	1.6
  J	1.6
  I	1
  H	1
  G	1.5
  S	1.2
  ...
  ```
* a S[x]G[y]_biohansel.fasta file
  *standard fasta formating
  * This file contains all the non-degenerate positve and negative k-mers required for a biohansel scheme.  This will require further filtering for optimal scheme development
  * Naming convention is to include parameter information [x] is the required snp support per valid group and [y] is the minimum group size 
    ```
    >305-1
    GAACAGTGCGGGCTTTTTTTTCGACCAGAGA
    >negative305-1
    GAACAGTGCGGGCTTGTTTTTCGACCAGAGA
    >2685-1
    GGCGTTCTACAGCCATTATTATCAGCCCTTG
    >negative2685-1
    GGCGTTCTACAGCCACTATTATCAGCCCTTG
    >5021-1
    ATGACCCGCCAGTAATCATTGCGCCCGGTGG
    ...
    ```
* a S[x]G[y]_biohansel.log file
  * tab delimited
  * This file contains a more human-readable version of the information contained in the biohansel.fasta file
  * Naming convention is to include parameter information [x] is the required snp support per valid group and [y] is the minimum group size
    ```
    305	1	GAACAGTGCGGGCTTTTTTTTCGACCAGAGA
    negative305	1	GAACAGTGCGGGCTTGTTTTTCGACCAGAGA
    2685	1	GGCGTTCTACAGCCATTATTATCAGCCCTTG
    negative2685	1	GGCGTTCTACAGCCACTATTATCAGCCCTTG
    5021	1	ATGACCCGCCAGTAATCATTGCGCCCGGTGG
    negative5021	1	ATGACCCGCCAGTAACCATTGCGCCCGGTGG
    5392	1	CAGATTCACCACCACACGATCGCCCTGCGCC
    negative5392	1	CAGATTCACCACCACCCGATCGCCCTGCGCC
    1180	1	CAGATCCCCTGTCTGTTTAAAAATACCGGTA
    negative1180	1	CAGATCCCCTGTCTGATTAAAAATACCGGTA
    ...
    ```
* a S[x]G[y]snp_report.txt file
  * tab delimited
  * This file contains a detailed report of the results of bioCanon for each snp in the vcf file
  * Naming convention is to include parameter information [x] is the required snp support per valid group and [y] is the minimum group size
    ```
    Position	Included	Supports	 Exclusion Reason
    1366	N		 no variability in the supplied vcf file
    68	N		 could not be matched to a branch point in the data.
    1017	N		 could not be matched to a branch point in the data.
    366	N		 a non-degenerate 31bp kmer could not be generated.
    945	N		 a non-degenerate 31bp kmer could not be generated.
    2050	N		 a non-degenerate 31bp kmer could not be generated.
    T6736	N		the number of size difference between its group and the parent group was less than 1.
    T6991	N		the number of size difference between its group and the parent group was less than 1.
    5110	Y	1.1
    9797	Y	1.6
    ...
    ```

### Accessory Scripts

There are three tool/accessory scripts included with bioCanon: filter_vcf.py, scheme_qa_tool.py, and biohansel_to_tsv.py.

#### Scheme QA Tool

The scheme_qa_tool.py script takes a bioCannon scheme and a directory containg either .fastq or .fasta files.  It runs biohansel on the sequence data using the provided scheme to type the sequences.  Poorly performing tiles are identified and outputted to a .csv file which can be used as input to filter_vcf.py. 

##### Arguments

###### --in_scheme
* Required

Expects the name and path of a scheme file in the biohansel format.  bioCanon produces schemes in this format by default.

###### --in_seq_data
* Required

Expects a directory where the sequence or sequences of interest are stored.

###### --outdir
* Required

Expects an output directory.  Will overwrite existing files if the directory already exists.

###### --biohansel_arguments
* Optional

Expects a quoted string of biohansel arguments('--arg1 value1 --arg2 value2').

###### --filter_out_below
* Optional

Filter out tiles which fall below the specified ratio of occurrences of the tile/expected occurrences.  Each tile is expecte to occur once per sample.  Expects a floating point value.

###### --filter_out_above
* Optional

Filter out tiles which exceed the specified ratio.  Expects a floating point value.

##### Outputs

bioqa_kmer.tsv - A target/tile based summary report.
bioqa_filtered.tsv - A .tsv containing tiles filtered out based on user settings.

##### Examples

```
python3 ./bioCanon/scheme_qa_tool.py --in_scheme ./out/sample.fasta --in_seq_data ./bioqa_test/fastq_data_directory/  --outdir output_directory/ 
```

#### biohansel_to_tsv.py

##### Inputs

##### Outputs

#### filter_vcf.py

##### Inputs

##### Outputs

## Running the tests

Tests for the module can be found in the repository under the tests subfolder.  They are pytest compatible scripts and once downloaded can be read using the python -m pytest command from the downloaded repository directory.

The current testing suite tests functions in main by supplying them with test data and comparing it against an expected result.


## Authors

* **James Robertson** - Prototype Code
* **Amanda Saunders** - Code Optimization, Documentation, Tools
* **Justin Schonfeld** - Code Optimization, Documentation, Tools

See also the list of [contributors](https://github.com/your/project/contributors) who participated in this project.

## Contact

For questions about bioCanon which fall outside the usual Github framework please contact justin.schonfeld@canada.ca

## License

This project is licensed under the MIT License - see the [LICENSE.md](LICENSE.md) file for details

## Acknowledgments

* Genevieve Labbe and Shannon Eagle for testing.
